README.md, before:

# @ljoukov/llm

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@ljoukov/llm.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ljoukov/llm)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@ljoukov/llm.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ljoukov/llm)
[![CI](https://github.com/ljoukov/llm/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ljoukov/llm/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/@ljoukov/llm.svg)](./LICENSE)

Unified TypeScript wrapper over:

- **OpenAI Responses API** (`openai`)
- **Google Gemini via Vertex AI** (`@google/genai`)
- **Fireworks chat-completions models** (`kimi-k2.5`, `glm-5`, `minimax-m2.1`)
- **ChatGPT subscription models** via `chatgpt-*` model ids (requires `CHATGPT_AUTH_JSON_B64`)

Designed around a single streaming API that yields:

- response text deltas
- thought (reasoning summary) deltas
- usage token counts + estimated USD cost

## Install

```bash
npm i @ljoukov/llm
```

## Environment variables

This package optionally loads a `.env.local` file from `process.cwd()` (Node.js) on first use (dotenv-style `KEY=value`
syntax) and does not override already-set `process.env` values. It always falls back to plain environment variables.

See Node.js docs on environment variables and dotenv files: https://nodejs.org/api/environment_variables.html#dotenv

### OpenAI

- `OPENAI_API_KEY`

### Gemini (Vertex AI)

- `GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON` (the contents of a service account JSON key file, not a file path)

#### Get a service account key JSON

You need a **Google service account key JSON** for your Firebase / GCP project (this is what you put into
`GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON`).

- **Firebase Console:** your project -> Project settings -> **Service accounts** -> **Generate new private key**
- **Google Cloud Console:** IAM & Admin -> **Service Accounts** -> select/create an account -> **Keys** -> **Add key** ->
  **Create new key** -> JSON

Either path is enough. Both produce the same kind of service account key `.json` file.

Official docs: https://docs.cloud.google.com/iam/docs/keys-create-delete

Store the JSON on one line (recommended):

```bash
jq -c . < path/to/service-account.json
```

Set it for local dev:

```bash
export GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON="$(jq -c . < path/to/service-account.json)"
```

If deploying to Cloudflare Workers/Pages:

```bash
jq -c . < path/to/service-account.json | wrangler secret put GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON
```

### Fireworks

- `FIREWORKS_TOKEN` (or `FIREWORKS_API_KEY`)

### ChatGPT subscription models

- `CHATGPT_AUTH_JSON_B64`

This is a base64url-encoded JSON blob containing the ChatGPT OAuth tokens + account id (RFC 4648):
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4648

## Usage

`v2` uses OpenAI-style request fields:

- `input`: string or message array
- `instructions`: optional top-level system instructions
- message roles: `developer`, `system`, `user`, `assistant`

### Basic (non-streaming)

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Write one sentence about TypeScript.",
});

console.log(result.text);
console.log(result.usage, result.costUsd);
```

### Streaming (response + thoughts + usage)

```ts
import { streamText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const call = streamText({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Explain what a hash function is in one paragraph.",
});

for await (const event of call.events) {
  if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "thought") {
    process.stderr.write(event.text);
  }
  if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "response") {
    process.stdout.write(event.text);
  }
  if (event.type === "usage") {
    console.log("\n\nusage:", event.usage, "costUsd:", event.costUsd);
  }
}

const result = await call.result;
console.log("\nmodelVersion:", result.modelVersion);
```

### Full conversation (multi-turn)

Pass a full message array via `input`.

```ts
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "system",
    content: "You are a concise assistant.",
  },
  {
    role: "user",
    content: "Summarize: Rust is a systems programming language.",
  },
  {
    role: "assistant",
    content: "Rust is a fast, memory-safe systems language.",
  },
  {
    role: "user",
    content: "Now rewrite it in 1 sentence.",
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

### Attachments (files / images)

Use `inlineData` parts to attach base64-encoded bytes (intermixed with text). `inlineData.data` is base64 (not a data
URL).

Note: `inlineData` is mapped based on `mimeType`.

- `image/*` -> image input (`input_image`)
- otherwise -> file input (`input_file`, e.g. `application/pdf`)

```ts
import fs from "node:fs";
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const imageB64 = fs.readFileSync("image.png").toString("base64");

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "user",
    content: [
      { type: "text", text: "Describe this image in 1 paragraph." },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "image/png", data: imageB64 },
    ],
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

PDF attachment example:

```ts
import fs from "node:fs";
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const pdfB64 = fs.readFileSync("doc.pdf").toString("base64");

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "user",
    content: [
      { type: "text", text: "Summarize this PDF in 5 bullet points." },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "application/pdf", data: pdfB64 },
    ],
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

Intermixed text + multiple images (e.g. compare two images):

```ts
import fs from "node:fs";
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const a = fs.readFileSync("a.png").toString("base64");
const b = fs.readFileSync("b.png").toString("base64");

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "user",
    content: [
      { type: "text", text: "Compare the two images. List the important differences." },
      { type: "text", text: "Image A:" },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "image/png", data: a },
      { type: "text", text: "Image B:" },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "image/png", data: b },
    ],
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

### Gemini

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "gemini-2.5-pro",
  input: "Return exactly: OK",
});

console.log(result.text);
```

### Fireworks

Use Fireworks model ids directly (for example `kimi-k2.5`, `glm-5`, `minimax-m2.1`):

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "kimi-k2.5",
  input: "Return exactly: OK",
});

console.log(result.text);
```

### ChatGPT subscription models

Use a `chatgpt-` prefix:

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "chatgpt-gpt-5.1-codex-mini",
  input: "Return exactly: OK",
});

console.log(result.text);
```

## JSON outputs

`generateJson()` validates the output with Zod and returns the parsed value.

- OpenAI API models use structured outputs (`json_schema`) when possible.
- Gemini uses `responseJsonSchema`.
- `chatgpt-*` models try to use structured outputs too; if rejected by the endpoint/model, it falls back to best-effort
  JSON parsing.

```ts
import { generateJson } from "@ljoukov/llm";
import { z } from "zod";

const schema = z.object({
  ok: z.boolean(),
  message: z.string(),
});

const { value } = await generateJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
});

console.log(value.ok, value.message);
```

### Streaming JSON outputs

Use `streamJson()` to stream thought deltas and get best-effort partial JSON snapshots while the model is still
generating.

```ts
import { streamJson } from "@ljoukov/llm";
import { z } from "zod";

const schema = z.object({
  ok: z.boolean(),
  message: z.string(),
});

const call = streamJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
});

for await (const event of call.events) {
  if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "thought") {
    process.stdout.write(event.text);
  }
  if (event.type === "json" && event.stage === "partial") {
    console.log("partial:", event.value);
  }
}

const { value } = await call.result;
console.log("final:", value);
```

If you only want thought deltas (no partial JSON), set `streamMode: "final"`.

```ts
const call = streamJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
  streamMode: "final",
});
```

If you want to keep `generateJson()` but still stream thoughts, pass an `onEvent` callback.

```ts
const { value } = await generateJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
  onEvent: (event) => {
    if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "thought") {
      process.stdout.write(event.text);
    }
  },
});
```

## Tools

There are three tool-enabled call patterns:

1. `generateText()` for provider-native/server-side tools (for example web search).
2. `runToolLoop()` for your runtime JS/TS tools (function tools executed in your process).
3. `runAgentLoop()` for filesystem tasks (a convenience wrapper around `runToolLoop()`).

Architecture note:

- Filesystem tools are not a separate execution system.
- `runAgentLoop()` constructs a filesystem toolset, merges your optional custom tools, then calls the same `runToolLoop()` engine.
- This behavior is model-agnostic at API level; profile selection only adapts tool shape for model compatibility.

### Provider-Native Tools (`generateText()`)

Use this when the model provider executes the tool remotely (for example search/code-exec style tools).

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Find 3 relevant sources about X and summarize them.",
  tools: [{ type: "web-search", mode: "live" }, { type: "code-execution" }],
});

console.log(result.text);
```

### Runtime Tools (`runToolLoop()`)

Use this when the model should call your local runtime functions.

```ts
import { runToolLoop, tool } from "@ljoukov/llm";
import { z } from "zod";

const result = await runToolLoop({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "What is 12 * 9? Use the tool.",
  tools: {
    multiply: tool({
      description: "Multiply two integers.",
      inputSchema: z.object({ a: z.number(), b: z.number() }),
      execute: ({ a, b }) => ({ value: a * b }),
    }),
  },
});

console.log(result.text);
```

Use `customTool()` only when you need freeform/non-JSON tool input grammar.

### Filesystem Tasks (`runAgentLoop()`)

Use this for read/search/write tasks in a workspace. The library auto-selects filesystem tool profile by model when `profile: "auto"`:

- Codex-like models: Codex-compatible filesystem tool shape.
- Gemini models: Gemini-compatible filesystem tool shape.
- Other models: model-agnostic profile (currently Gemini-style).

Confinement/policy is set through `filesystemTool.options`:

- `cwd`: workspace root for path resolution.
- `fs`: backend (`createNodeAgentFilesystem()` or `createInMemoryAgentFilesystem()`).
- `checkAccess`: hook for allow/deny policy + audit.
- `allowOutsideCwd`: opt-out confinement (default is false).

Detailed reference: `docs/agent-filesystem-tools.md`.

```ts
import { createInMemoryAgentFilesystem, runAgentLoop } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const fs = createInMemoryAgentFilesystem({
  "/repo/src/a.ts": "export const value = 1;\n",
});

const result = await runAgentLoop({
  model: "chatgpt-gpt-5.3-codex-spark",
  input: "Change value from 1 to 2 using filesystem tools.",
  filesystemTool: {
    profile: "auto",
    options: {
      cwd: "/repo",
      fs,
    },
  },
});

console.log(result.text);
```

If you need exact control over tool definitions, build the filesystem toolset yourself and call `runToolLoop()` directly.

```ts
import {
  createFilesystemToolSetForModel,
  createInMemoryAgentFilesystem,
  runToolLoop,
} from "@ljoukov/llm";

const fs = createInMemoryAgentFilesystem({ "/repo/a.ts": "export const n = 1;\n" });
const tools = createFilesystemToolSetForModel("chatgpt-gpt-5.3-codex-spark", {
  cwd: "/repo",
  fs,
});

const result = await runToolLoop({
  model: "chatgpt-gpt-5.3-codex-spark",
  input: "Update n to 2.",
  tools,
});
```

## Agent benchmark (filesystem extraction)

For filesystem extraction/summarization evaluation across Codex, Fireworks, and Gemini models:

```bash
npm run bench:agent
```

Standard full refresh (all tasks, auto-write `LATEST_RESULTS.md`, refresh `traces/latest`, prune old traces):

```bash
npm run bench:agent:latest
```

Estimate-only:

```bash
npm run bench:agent:estimate
```

See `benchmarks/agent/README.md` for options and output format.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add ChatGPT auth server worker and client support

README.md, after:

# @ljoukov/llm

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@ljoukov/llm.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ljoukov/llm)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@ljoukov/llm.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ljoukov/llm)
[![CI](https://github.com/ljoukov/llm/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ljoukov/llm/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/@ljoukov/llm.svg)](./LICENSE)

Unified TypeScript wrapper over:

- **OpenAI Responses API** (`openai`)
- **Google Gemini via Vertex AI** (`@google/genai`)
- **Fireworks chat-completions models** (`kimi-k2.5`, `glm-5`, `minimax-m2.1`)
- **ChatGPT subscription models** via `chatgpt-*` model ids (requires `CHATGPT_AUTH_JSON_B64`)

Designed around a single streaming API that yields:

- response text deltas
- thought (reasoning summary) deltas
- usage token counts + estimated USD cost

## Install

```bash
npm i @ljoukov/llm
```

## Environment variables

This package optionally loads a `.env.local` file from `process.cwd()` (Node.js) on first use (dotenv-style `KEY=value`
syntax) and does not override already-set `process.env` values. It always falls back to plain environment variables.

See Node.js docs on environment variables and dotenv files: https://nodejs.org/api/environment_variables.html#dotenv

### OpenAI

- `OPENAI_API_KEY`

### Gemini (Vertex AI)

- `GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON` (the contents of a service account JSON key file, not a file path)

#### Get a service account key JSON

You need a **Google service account key JSON** for your Firebase / GCP project (this is what you put into
`GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON`).

- **Firebase Console:** your project -> Project settings -> **Service accounts** -> **Generate new private key**
- **Google Cloud Console:** IAM & Admin -> **Service Accounts** -> select/create an account -> **Keys** -> **Add key** ->
  **Create new key** -> JSON

Either path is enough. Both produce the same kind of service account key `.json` file.

Official docs: https://docs.cloud.google.com/iam/docs/keys-create-delete

Store the JSON on one line (recommended):

```bash
jq -c . < path/to/service-account.json
```

Set it for local dev:

```bash
export GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON="$(jq -c . < path/to/service-account.json)"
```

If deploying to Cloudflare Workers/Pages:

```bash
jq -c . < path/to/service-account.json | wrangler secret put GOOGLE_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_JSON
```

### Fireworks

- `FIREWORKS_TOKEN` (or `FIREWORKS_API_KEY`)

### ChatGPT subscription models

- `CHATGPT_AUTH_JSON_B64`

This is a base64url-encoded JSON blob containing the ChatGPT OAuth tokens + account id (RFC 4648):
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4648

Optional alternative (recommended for multi-deploy setups): use a centralized auth server (for example a Cloudflare
Worker) that owns refresh-token rotation and serves short-lived access tokens over HTTPS.

- `CHATGPT_AUTH_SERVER_URL` (example: `https://chatgpt-auth.<your-subdomain>.workers.dev`)
- `CHATGPT_AUTH_API_KEY` (shared secret; sent as `Authorization: Bearer ...` and `x-chatgpt-auth: ...`)
- `CHATGPT_AUTH_SERVER_STORE` (`kv` or `d1`, defaults to `kv`)

If `CHATGPT_AUTH_SERVER_URL` + `CHATGPT_AUTH_API_KEY` are set, `chatgpt-*` models will fetch tokens from the auth
server and ignore local `CHATGPT_AUTH_JSON_B64`.

## Usage

`v2` uses OpenAI-style request fields:

- `input`: string or message array
- `instructions`: optional top-level system instructions
- message roles: `developer`, `system`, `user`, `assistant`

### Basic (non-streaming)

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Write one sentence about TypeScript.",
});

console.log(result.text);
console.log(result.usage, result.costUsd);
```

### Streaming (response + thoughts + usage)

```ts
import { streamText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const call = streamText({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Explain what a hash function is in one paragraph.",
});

for await (const event of call.events) {
  if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "thought") {
    process.stderr.write(event.text);
  }
  if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "response") {
    process.stdout.write(event.text);
  }
  if (event.type === "usage") {
    console.log("\n\nusage:", event.usage, "costUsd:", event.costUsd);
  }
}

const result = await call.result;
console.log("\nmodelVersion:", result.modelVersion);
```

### Full conversation (multi-turn)

Pass a full message array via `input`.

```ts
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "system",
    content: "You are a concise assistant.",
  },
  {
    role: "user",
    content: "Summarize: Rust is a systems programming language.",
  },
  {
    role: "assistant",
    content: "Rust is a fast, memory-safe systems language.",
  },
  {
    role: "user",
    content: "Now rewrite it in 1 sentence.",
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

### Attachments (files / images)

Use `inlineData` parts to attach base64-encoded bytes (intermixed with text). `inlineData.data` is base64 (not a data
URL).

Note: `inlineData` is mapped based on `mimeType`.

- `image/*` -> image input (`input_image`)
- otherwise -> file input (`input_file`, e.g. `application/pdf`)

```ts
import fs from "node:fs";
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const imageB64 = fs.readFileSync("image.png").toString("base64");

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "user",
    content: [
      { type: "text", text: "Describe this image in 1 paragraph." },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "image/png", data: imageB64 },
    ],
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

PDF attachment example:

```ts
import fs from "node:fs";
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const pdfB64 = fs.readFileSync("doc.pdf").toString("base64");

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "user",
    content: [
      { type: "text", text: "Summarize this PDF in 5 bullet points." },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "application/pdf", data: pdfB64 },
    ],
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

Intermixed text + multiple images (e.g. compare two images):

```ts
import fs from "node:fs";
import { generateText, type LlmInputMessage } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const a = fs.readFileSync("a.png").toString("base64");
const b = fs.readFileSync("b.png").toString("base64");

const input: LlmInputMessage[] = [
  {
    role: "user",
    content: [
      { type: "text", text: "Compare the two images. List the important differences." },
      { type: "text", text: "Image A:" },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "image/png", data: a },
      { type: "text", text: "Image B:" },
      { type: "inlineData", mimeType: "image/png", data: b },
    ],
  },
];

const result = await generateText({ model: "gpt-5.2", input });
console.log(result.text);
```

### Gemini

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "gemini-2.5-pro",
  input: "Return exactly: OK",
});

console.log(result.text);
```

### Fireworks

Use Fireworks model ids directly (for example `kimi-k2.5`, `glm-5`, `minimax-m2.1`):

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "kimi-k2.5",
  input: "Return exactly: OK",
});

console.log(result.text);
```

### ChatGPT subscription models

Use a `chatgpt-` prefix:

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "chatgpt-gpt-5.1-codex-mini",
  input: "Return exactly: OK",
});

console.log(result.text);
```

## JSON outputs

`generateJson()` validates the output with Zod and returns the parsed value.

- OpenAI API models use structured outputs (`json_schema`) when possible.
- Gemini uses `responseJsonSchema`.
- `chatgpt-*` models try to use structured outputs too; if rejected by the endpoint/model, it falls back to best-effort
  JSON parsing.

```ts
import { generateJson } from "@ljoukov/llm";
import { z } from "zod";

const schema = z.object({
  ok: z.boolean(),
  message: z.string(),
});

const { value } = await generateJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
});

console.log(value.ok, value.message);
```

### Streaming JSON outputs

Use `streamJson()` to stream thought deltas and get best-effort partial JSON snapshots while the model is still
generating.

```ts
import { streamJson } from "@ljoukov/llm";
import { z } from "zod";

const schema = z.object({
  ok: z.boolean(),
  message: z.string(),
});

const call = streamJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
});

for await (const event of call.events) {
  if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "thought") {
    process.stdout.write(event.text);
  }
  if (event.type === "json" && event.stage === "partial") {
    console.log("partial:", event.value);
  }
}

const { value } = await call.result;
console.log("final:", value);
```

If you only want thought deltas (no partial JSON), set `streamMode: "final"`.

```ts
const call = streamJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
  streamMode: "final",
});
```

If you want to keep `generateJson()` but still stream thoughts, pass an `onEvent` callback.

```ts
const { value } = await generateJson({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Return a JSON object with ok=true and message='hello'.",
  schema,
  onEvent: (event) => {
    if (event.type === "delta" && event.channel === "thought") {
      process.stdout.write(event.text);
    }
  },
});
```

## Tools

There are three tool-enabled call patterns:

1. `generateText()` for provider-native/server-side tools (for example web search).
2. `runToolLoop()` for your runtime JS/TS tools (function tools executed in your process).
3. `runAgentLoop()` for filesystem tasks (a convenience wrapper around `runToolLoop()`).

Architecture note:

- Filesystem tools are not a separate execution system.
- `runAgentLoop()` constructs a filesystem toolset, merges your optional custom tools, then calls the same `runToolLoop()` engine.
- This behavior is model-agnostic at API level; profile selection only adapts tool shape for model compatibility.

### Provider-Native Tools (`generateText()`)

Use this when the model provider executes the tool remotely (for example search/code-exec style tools).

```ts
import { generateText } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const result = await generateText({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "Find 3 relevant sources about X and summarize them.",
  tools: [{ type: "web-search", mode: "live" }, { type: "code-execution" }],
});

console.log(result.text);
```

### Runtime Tools (`runToolLoop()`)

Use this when the model should call your local runtime functions.

```ts
import { runToolLoop, tool } from "@ljoukov/llm";
import { z } from "zod";

const result = await runToolLoop({
  model: "gpt-5.2",
  input: "What is 12 * 9? Use the tool.",
  tools: {
    multiply: tool({
      description: "Multiply two integers.",
      inputSchema: z.object({ a: z.number(), b: z.number() }),
      execute: ({ a, b }) => ({ value: a * b }),
    }),
  },
});

console.log(result.text);
```

Use `customTool()` only when you need freeform/non-JSON tool input grammar.

### Filesystem Tasks (`runAgentLoop()`)

Use this for read/search/write tasks in a workspace. The library auto-selects filesystem tool profile by model when `profile: "auto"`:

- Codex-like models: Codex-compatible filesystem tool shape.
- Gemini models: Gemini-compatible filesystem tool shape.
- Other models: model-agnostic profile (currently Gemini-style).

Confinement/policy is set through `filesystemTool.options`:

- `cwd`: workspace root for path resolution.
- `fs`: backend (`createNodeAgentFilesystem()` or `createInMemoryAgentFilesystem()`).
- `checkAccess`: hook for allow/deny policy + audit.
- `allowOutsideCwd`: opt-out confinement (default is false).

Detailed reference: `docs/agent-filesystem-tools.md`.

```ts
import { createInMemoryAgentFilesystem, runAgentLoop } from "@ljoukov/llm";

const fs = createInMemoryAgentFilesystem({
  "/repo/src/a.ts": "export const value = 1;\n",
});

const result = await runAgentLoop({
  model: "chatgpt-gpt-5.3-codex-spark",
  input: "Change value from 1 to 2 using filesystem tools.",
  filesystemTool: {
    profile: "auto",
    options: {
      cwd: "/repo",
      fs,
    },
  },
});

console.log(result.text);
```

If you need exact control over tool definitions, build the filesystem toolset yourself and call `runToolLoop()` directly.

```ts
import {
  createFilesystemToolSetForModel,
  createInMemoryAgentFilesystem,
  runToolLoop,
} from "@ljoukov/llm";

const fs = createInMemoryAgentFilesystem({ "/repo/a.ts": "export const n = 1;\n" });
const tools = createFilesystemToolSetForModel("chatgpt-gpt-5.3-codex-spark", {
  cwd: "/repo",
  fs,
});

const result = await runToolLoop({
  model: "chatgpt-gpt-5.3-codex-spark",
  input: "Update n to 2.",
  tools,
});
```

## Agent benchmark (filesystem extraction)

For filesystem extraction/summarization evaluation across Codex, Fireworks, and Gemini models:

```bash
npm run bench:agent
```

Standard full refresh (all tasks, auto-write `LATEST_RESULTS.md`, refresh `traces/latest`, prune old traces):

```bash
npm run bench:agent:latest
```

Estimate-only:

```bash
npm run bench:agent:estimate
```

See `benchmarks/agent/README.md` for options and output format.

## License

MIT
